From The New York Times, [music] I'm
Natalie Kitroeff. This is The Daily.
>> [music]
>> President Trump is preparing to make a
crucial trip to China this week
>> [music]
>> to meet with Chinese President Xi
Jinping.
A key question hanging over that meeting
[music] is artificial intelligence and
whether the global race in AI may be
spinning out of control.
>> [music]
>> Today, my colleague Vivian Wang explains
how China's approaching artificial
intelligence differently from the United
States and [music] what that means about
who's winning the global competition for
AI dominance.
>> [music]
>> It's Monday, May 11th.
Vivian, we've come to you because you've
been reporting on China for 6 years. Is
that right? Yes. Okay. And your beat has
essentially been AI of late. And I think
there is one main question that everyone
is asking when it comes to the global AI
race and that is is China beating us? I
think that's a really hard question to
answer because China and the United
States are actually running very
different races with different goals and
different metrics of success.
And I think China is very confident that
along its chosen path, it is doing very
well. Okay, so what is that chosen path?
Talk to me about that. From the
beginning, China's strategy when it
comes to AI has been putting it in
people's hands, putting it in factories,
putting it everywhere throughout the
economy. It's this focus on real-world
applications. And that's really
different from the way that I think
Silicon Valley and a lot of American
policy makers talk about AI, which is
generally revolving around AGI, right?
This idea that AI is building towards
this super powerful super human
intelligence. Whereas China and Chinese
policy makers have always kind of talked
about AI as this way towards making the
economy run better. Hm.
So, if you just walk around on the
street in China, you are going to
encounter different manifestations of AI
everywhere.
There are driverless cars in a ton of
Chinese cities.
>> [music]
>> There are robots everywhere from
restaurants to just patrolling the
streets to definitely, of course, in
[music] factories.
And people have found ways to use it
[music] in places that we might never
have imagined. I recently talked to a
few different parents who have thought
of really creative ways to use AI in
their children's educations. Huh. I like
myself.
One mom had bought this [music] AI
contraption that was basically a
translation mask that she would wear to
help her kids practice speaking English.
A translation mask?
>> Yeah, it really looks like [music] the
mask that Bane wears in the Batman
movies. Mommy, who do you like? And the
way it works is that she would speak
into it
in Chinese, and then what would come out
was a version of her voice but speaking
English.
I like you.
Mommy, I love you, too.
>> [music]
>> Wow. And so, she would just wear it
around the house to talk to her kids.
What are you eating? I'm eating
pomegranate.
Is it tasty?
Yes, it's a delicious.
You have to really love AI to like
[music] put on a Bane mask to talk to
your kid. I mean, I just can't totally
imagine it, but that's commitment.
[music] Yeah, I think that what's been
really striking to me about observing
just the way that people in China are
talking about and thinking about AI is
people are really excited about it. You
know, in America when people talk about
AI there's this whole doomer
conversation. A lot of people are really
nervous about it, you know, either
taking their job or taking over the
entire world. And that conversation is
just a lot quieter in China.
>> [music]
>> Okay, so when you say that China feels
like it's doing pretty well given the
path that it's taken on AI, what you
mean by that is making people kind of
fall in love a little bit with AI it
sounds like and also making it so that
AI is everywhere. Yeah, China is really
focused on how AI can be useful to them
now.
And that comes in part because China has
a lot of really deep structural issues
that without AI I think they really
don't have a way to solve. So, for
example, the population and the
workforce are aging really quickly. And
how do you solve that if young people
don't want to have children? Well, maybe
using AI to make your factories more
efficient. Another problem is huge
inequities between access to healthcare
in rural and urban areas. If you don't
have enough doctors, how do you solve
that? Maybe AI doctors are the answer.
So, it sounds like in a sense there may
be quite a bit riding on AI from the
Chinese government's perspective if it's
being seen as a potential solution to
all these really important problems. I
think so. Yeah, the Chinese government
historically has always been quite
optimistic about technology. I mean, if
you look at the past few decades
technology has been a big part of what
has powered China's amazing economic
rise. And so I think they see AI is
basically the latest iteration of some
kind of technology that is going to help
them on this global ascent and is going
to solve these problems that they have.
Got it. So, when does that relationship
between the Chinese government and AI
actually begin? What's that story?
So, the key moment is in 2014.
It was early in Xi Jinping's tenure as
leader of China and he was giving a
speech to a gathering of some of China's
top engineers and scientists. And he had
gotten a bunch of reports from the
scientists ahead of time kind of giving
him suggestions on what, you know, they
thought China's next direction in
science should be.
And Xi gets up there and he gives a
speech and he says, "Oh, thank you so
much for for all of your suggestions. I
read them all and I was really
interested in this one report that said
intelligent robots are going to be a
really big deal going forward." And he
basically says, "I want China to be on
top of that. I want China to be the
number one maker of intelligent robots
and I also want us to dominate all sorts
of other technologies that are going to
be the future." And this turns into a
plan in 2017 that is called China's new
generation AI development plan, which is
their first national-level roadmap of
what they are going to do with AI.
And it sets out a goal that says they
want China to be
a leading AI power by 2030. And it also
says that the way it's going to get
there is through real-world
applications. And given how things
typically go in China, from my
understanding, I'm assuming that what
happens next is what always happens when
they have a plan, which is that they
pour boatloads of money into it into
supercharging it. Am I right? Yeah,
exactly. It kind of sets the gears of
government going at all levels.
>> [music]
>> So, after this national plan comes out,
then you have the provincial and local
governments sort of falling over
themselves to show how they are
complying. Yong Zhao is attempting to
recreate a Silicon Valley style work
environment in Beijing's Zhongguancun
district. So, they start building
industrial parks to attract top
companies. They start giving tax breaks
and sort of free or cheap rent to these
companies.
It was a good decision to come back to
China.
I think it's easier to get funding here
than in Silicon Valley. And they start
giving them money to attract the top
talent. It's really this [music] all-in
national effort to deliver. And what's
the effect of that?
So, for a few years China really feels
like it has the lead in AI. Police in
Beijing have been wearing these glasses
that can recognize faces linked to the
government's national database. It can
tell whether it is a adult, a child, a
male or female.
How advanced [music] is this technology?
This is a cutting edge. Especially at
the time they were really focused on
developing technologies like facial
recognition and voice recognition, and
Chinese companies really were at the
forefront of this. They were some of the
best [music] in the world, and this was
of course also really useful for China's
surveillance apparatus. We're trying to
transform our economic model from made
in China to created in China.
But then in 2022,
ChatGPT comes on the scene. ChatGPT
ChatGPT ChatGPT is technology accessible
[music] and free to anyone on the web
that impersonates what it's read on the
internet.
>> This promises to be the viral sensation
that could completely [music]
reset how we do things. And that really
caught [music] Chinese policy makers and
Chinese tech companies off guard. It
caught everybody off guard. Yeah,
exactly. [music]
And for China, I think it was a moment
that made them sit back and think,
"Okay, we thought we had the lead on AI
when it came to facial recognition, but
here is this completely different area,
generative AI, that they had not been
thinking about as much."
And it kind of scares the Chinese
government because generative AI, you
know, it's this thing that is looking at
all of the information on the internet.
It's coming up with answers that are
sort of unpredictable. And the Chinese
government becomes really nervous that
this is going to be a threat to their
information controls, their censorship
regime. You know, they don't want
Chinese people plugging questions about
politically sensitive events into a
chatbot and getting answers that they
don't want the people to be getting.
Hmm. So, they're looking at this as a
potential threat to their political
model. Exactly. I think that, you know,
they had been thinking about AI as this
really powerful tool for the economy and
in some ways to solidify their grip on
political control, but here is proof
that it also could be a problem. And so,
you see them react. ChatGPT is banned in
China. The Chinese government starts
putting out new regulations also on
Chinese AI companies that might be
working on generative AI. For example,
they quickly roll out a rule that says
if any Chinese AI company is building a
model that can, quote-unquote, mobilize
society,
it has to first pass a series of checks
and clearances with the Chinese
government before it can be released to
the public. Hmm. What are those checks
and clearances? So, basically, you have
to do safety testing, but I think when
we think about safety testing in the
West, right, it's making sure that the
chatbot is not feeding its users answers
that might push them to self-harm or,
you know, feeding hate speech. In China,
there is that element, but there's also
the element of making sure that it
doesn't provide answers about
politically sensitive questions like the
June 4th massacre in Tiananmen Square or
about China's top leaders that the
government might not want Chinese people
asking. It sounds like there's this
tension for the Chinese government
between wanting to dominate in AI which
now includes this world of generative AI
but also from an authoritarian
perspective wanting to maintain as much
control as they can over information
which is so key to powering these
models. I mean part of the reason for
the success of these chatbots is that
they pull from the entire universe of
information.
Yeah, and this is a tension that exists
in China's entire economic development
where the government knows that to allow
its economy to flourish it needs
openness, it needs interaction with the
rest of the world. But of course it also
wants that interaction to happen on its
own terms and within its own control. So
that tension is just even more
pronounced when it comes to AI. Hmm. And
so they are trying to maintain that
balance, trying to figure out how that
works. And then in early 2025 along
comes Deep Seek. Right.
>> Let's talk about Deep Seek because it is
mind-blowing and it is shaking this
entire industry to its core. The
emergence of So Deep Seek was a chatbot
created by a Chinese startup that really
no one had heard of before last year.
And it performed basically just as well
as leading models in the [snorts] United
States. Deep Seek says that their AI
model only cost 5.6
million dollars. Now we don't But
according to the company's founders it
had been trained for so much cheaper. It
was open source. And to have the Chinese
actually open sourcing it meaning that
that is going to be what goes around the
world. Huge, huge step up and change and
puts us a little bit on our back foot in
trying to figure out
>> And it was this wake-up call and this
sign to everybody around the world that
Chinese AI could compete with Silicon
Valley. I I I think Marc Andreessen put
it really smartly when he said that this
feels like the Sputnik moment for the AI
race. But when
>> And for all of China and the Chinese
government in particular, this is also a
moment of huge national pride.
Soon after Deep Seek's release, Xi
Jinping actually called a meeting of a
bunch of business leaders including the
founder of Deep Seek who's just a guy in
his 30s again who most people have never
heard of before this point.
And she tells the entrepreneurs there,
"Go out and show your talents and serve
the country."
>> [clears throat]
>> And this is seen as a really important
signal that the government recognized
that it needed to give companies a
little bit more space if it really
wanted them to be on the cutting edge.
And so I think what it's essentially
trying to do here is have its cake and
eat it, too. I talked to an analyst who
I thought put it really smartly. He
said, "The Chinese government is trying
to control what AI says but unleash what
it does."
And so basically, if you are making a
chatbot, if you are making some sort of
AI product that is going to be feeding
information to the Chinese people, you
are going to be under a greater degree
of restrictions. But if you are doing
robotics, if you are doing something
that doesn't really deal with
information that could directly
influence how Chinese people are
thinking, there are a lot fewer
restrictions there.
And did that meeting, did the new
signaling, the new messaging around this
actually lead to concrete changes that
you see in China? Like do you see it
manifest?
I think so. I I it's hard to say if it
came directly from that meeting or just
the excitement around DeepSeek in
general, but 2025 and this year have
really just been huge moments of
development in China's AI scene. You've
seen a ton of new models getting
registered. You've seen a bunch of
startups doing really well. And that's
also where you've seen kind of AI get
diffused so broadly into the economy in
all the ways that we talked about where
everyone's using it all the time. Right.
>> [music]
>> And we see how much they're doubling
down on AI just this past March when the
Chinese government released its
five-year plan, which is this grand
economic plan for how China's economy is
going to run for the next five years.
And this plan mentions AI more than 50
times. Wow. [music] So, it's really
clear that they are staking basically
their entire economic future [music] on
dominating AI.
And for Washington, that puts China on a
direct collision course [music] with US
tech.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
So, in the collision course that the US
sees China running headlong into, what
are China's disadvantages? I wondered,
for example, if some of the restrictions
that the government still has on the
development of AI, the control that it
exercises over it, might hold their
industry back in some meaningful ways.
Sure. And this is really the
million-dollar question, right? And I
think the answer is both yes and no. So,
when you look at just the models
themselves, the DeepSeek for example,
experts I've spoken to actually say that
they don't think the restrictions are
really making DeepSeek meaningfully less
powerful. In the sense that, sure, there
are some topics that DeepSeek cannot
answer, but actually, chatbots from
other also have red lines or sensitive
areas that they can't talk about.
>> Right.
>> They just might be different. And so,
when it comes to actually just the core
performance of the model, if you're not
asking about these sort of few
politically sensitive questions, experts
seem to think that actually China is not
meaningfully held back. Now, on the
other hand, I think there is a potential
issue when you look at the broader
political environment and the reality
that the government has shown that it's
willing to crack down at any point if it
feels threatened or a little bit not in
control of the entire situation.
>> Hmm. And I think that creates a really
uncertain business environment that
could make it difficult for Chinese
companies to thrive. Just talk about
what the effect of that could be. It
sounds like it could have a chilling
effect, but what is the impact of
knowing that the government could clamp
down at any moment? I think it just
creates a sort of weight in the back of
the entire Chinese private sector's mind
at all times. They always have to be
thinking about where are the red lines
that we have to be careful not to cross.
And part of the issue is that that's not
always clear. Sure, there are certain
really obvious ones like the question of
Taiwanese independence, but it's just
really hard to know what might trigger a
new red line or new dissatisfaction by
the Chinese government. And also, when
it comes to interacting with the rest of
the world, Chinese companies and
founders have to be really careful to
not to maybe get investment from the
wrong people or the wrong countries.
We actually saw a really clear example
of this just recently.
So, there was a really successful
hyped-up Chinese AI startup called
Manifold.
>> Manifold went viral after it claimed to
be the world's first general AI agent.
The agent is able to execute complex
tasks like market research, coding, and
data analysis. It eventually moved to
Singapore, but its founders were
Chinese. Its parent company is Chinese.
And last year
>> [music]
>> Meta closing out 2025 with an 11th hour
acquisition. The company announcing it
is buying Manas,
>> [music]
>> a Meta announced that it was going to
acquire Manas for $2 billion, which was
a really big deal. But [music] pretty
much immediately after this was
announced, the Chinese government said
that it was investigating this
acquisition. [music]
And just last month
>> China has blocked Meta's $2 billion
takeover of AI [music] startup Manas,
the
>> they actually announced that they were
not going to let the deal go forward.
This [music] comes as Beijing continues
to take steps to restrict US investment
in developing Chinese technologies. And
on top of that, during all of this,
during this investigation, my colleagues
reported that Manas's founders, after
they went back to China for a visit,
were [music] actually blocked from
leaving China.
What you're talking about with this case
is really the Chinese government
actively curtailing the ideal
environment that you would have for
innovation. And it's interesting because
China is famous for doing all of this
aggressive industrial policy making to
fuel its industries at home, but it
sounds like AI may just be a different
beast. Yeah, AI is just such a new field
and also such a a diverse field, right?
There are so many different types of AI.
And so, the government can't just say,
"Okay, this is the particular direction
that you need to go. We're going to
throw money at this particular problem
and we will suddenly be the world's AI
leaders." You really need to give
scientific minds and researchers kind of
the space and freedom to experiment and
and to kind of follow where their
scientific intuitions or or their
research is leading them. There's a
long-standing stereotype that might be a
bit of an overgeneralization,
but a lot of people tell me that they
think it still holds true, which is that
China is really good at the one to 10 of
scientific research, which is taking
some kind of scientific discovery and
finding the ways to just apply it
everywhere and really make it useful,
but it's not as good at the zero to one,
which is just getting to that
breakthrough discovery in the first
place. And I think that's where the
political environment does play a little
bit of a role. Right, you can't force
innovation from a top-down strategy.
So, is that the main disadvantage that
China sees itself having vis-a-vis the
US? Are there others? There are two
other really major areas. So, one is
chips and another one is talent. So, on
chips, which are the powerful hardware
that's necessary for training AI models,
the fact is that Chinese chips are just
not as powerful as American ones. So,
Chinese AI companies are still really
reliant on chips from Nvidia to make the
best AI that they can. Nvidia, an
American company.
>> Yeah. And China has spent hundreds of
billions of dollars on trying to develop
domestic powerful chips, but they just
haven't gotten there yet. And then the
other problem is talent. So, China
produces many, many, many extremely
talented AI researchers every year, but
without the sort of open, innovative
environment that we were just talking
about, many of them may choose and do
choose to go to the United States. And
so, Chinese companies and Chinese
policymakers have talked very openly
about how a shortage of talent is
another problem that they have to face.
These are pretty significant handicaps
that China has. Just to summarize what
you've said, it's an imperfect
environment for innovation, less
powerful chips, and this talent issue.
But, at the same time, we've also spent
the better part of this conversation
talking about all the ways in which
China is ahead in making AI practically
useful in people's lives, and making
sure it is everywhere. So, just to
return to that question that we wrestled
with in the beginning of this,
is China coming out on top in the global
AI race? I think if the end destination
of all of this AI is indeed AGI, this
superhuman intelligence that is just
going to run the world, then I do think
American companies are closer to that. I
do think Silicon Valley is closer to the
cutting edge of technology. But, it it
is important to point out that China is
not that far behind. It's a few months
behind by most experts' estimates.
But, if AGI is not the final
destination, I mean, if it's not even
possible, and the real way to go is to
just use AI to improve our daily lives
now, then I think China has the edge
because it already has deployed AI so
much more than the US has. And, it's
also important to note that by putting
AI everywhere, in these robots, in these
driverless cars, it's also generating a
bunch of new data all the time that is
making these Chinese models even better
every single day, which helps solve one
of the bigger problems in AI these days,
which is kind of just running out of
training data. China is just constantly
generating new data for its own models.
So, at the end of the day, I think that
the problem is AI is still so full of so
many unknowns. We don't know what the
future of this technology is. We don't
know what exactly it means to dominate
AI or what it would take to dominate AI.
And so, it's really impossible to say
who is pursuing the right path.
Vivian,
do you think there's a lesson for US
companies in China's approach to AI?
Because, it does seem as though the
ambition of reaching toward the
superhuman intelligence is so
quintessentially American. It's the
biggest, most innovative version of this
tech possible, but it's also potentially
backfiring in a sense because it seems
to be turning a lot of people against
this technology very forcefully. Whereas
focusing on more mundane, maybe less
ambitious goals
may be a more popular route. Yeah, I
think it is a really interesting
contrast with the United States, where
the public hesitation or even pushback
to AI is creating, in many ways,
political problems for these AI
companies. But in China, because people
are feeling that this AI is actually
tangibly improving their lives. It's
making their commute smoother. It's
making their food get delivered to them
faster. It's making products maybe
cheaper because factories are more
efficient. People really feel that this
technology could be something that is
good for them.
>> [snorts]
>> And I think it's worth noting that we
have started to see the conversation in
China shift a little bit, especially in
recent months. We have seen people start
to talk a little bit more about what
happens to my job if AI becomes
everywhere.
But I think that sentiment is still not
as, maybe, prominent as it is in the
United States.
And actually, that is maybe an
interesting result of the government
restrictions that we talked about. So,
yes, on the one hand, they might make it
more difficult for Chinese companies to
innovate. But on the other hand, I think
there's a general sense among many
Chinese people that the Chinese
government will keep this whole sector
under control. It will make sure that AI
is just not getting out of hand and
leaving society totally unstable. And
so, that also creates a certain degree
of trust in the technology. Right. And I
think, ironically, in the US, the fact
that we have this more free-wheeling
environment when it comes to AI, there's
something about that that makes people
more afraid of it. And that backlash
from the grassroots right now, that
could end up being a problem down the
line for AI development in the US. That
could be a headwind.
>> [music]
>> Yeah, I think that could prove to be a
real impediment to AI development in
America.
>> [music]
>> That is probably just not going to play
out in the same way in China.
Well, Vivian, thank you so much. Thank
you, Natalie.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
So, what the Virginia Supreme Court did
was [music] not only wrong, it was
disgraceful. They basically Democrats
are scrambling to respond to a Virginia
Supreme Court decision on Friday,
[music]
which struck down a new congressional
map that would have given the party an
advantage in the [music] midterms. You
know, the voters will have the last word
on this. The fallout of the decision is
huge. Even though Democrats are still
expected to win the House, [music] they
now have to flip more seats in hostile
territory.
In its 4-3 [music] decision, the court
said that Democrats had violated the
state's constitution by drawing a new
map meant to give the party [music] 10
of the state's 11 House seats.
In a private call [music] on Saturday,
Democratic lawmakers discussed trying to
restore the map with a move that would
replace the entire state Supreme Court
[music] by lowering the age of
retirement. It was unclear how many
Democrats would support such a drastic
solution. [music]
And passengers and crew from the cruise
ship that was hit by a deadly hantavirus
[music] outbreak were evacuated on
Sunday. The ship anchored off the Canary
Islands in Spain, [music] where health
officials checked the passengers'
temperatures and symptoms.
The Spanish health minister said
everyone [music] on board was
asymptomatic.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode was produced by [music]
Shannon Lin and Ricky Nicasio. It was
edited by Lisa Chow and contains music
by Marion Lozano,
>> [music]
>> Pat McCusker, and Dan Powell.
Our theme music is by Wonderly. This
episode was engineered by Alyssa Moxley.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for The Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitroeff. See you tomorrow. [music]